---
layout: post
title: Getting off the ground with C
---

For every program there is a `main` function which is the entry point for the program when it is executed. All of the statments in this `main` function are executed sequentially in the order written.

Lets run something first then discuss what it does. The following code can also be used as boilerplate code. 

### Code
{% highlight c %}
/* 
   Boilerplate Code
   Author - UA @uaftab.com
*/
// Comments in C/C++
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
    printf( "I am alive!  Beware.\n" );
    getchar();
    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Lets take a look at the elements of our program

The `#include` is called a pre-processor directive. 

Just a fancy way of saying that it tells the compiler to include the code from the specificed file into our program. 

This allows us to use to access methods, functions from different files and libraries that we may want to use. Also we can break up our program into multiple files for better code orgranization and readability. We will take a look later in this tutorial on how to use multiple files. 

`#include<stdio.h>` allows us access to input output functions (get it ? stdANDARD iNPUT oUTPUT) like `printf()` and `getchar()` among others. A list of all the functions is available [here] (http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/cstdio/) 

The next important line is `int main()` this is the decleration for the main function i.e. the entry point for the program. This line tells the compiler that there is a function named main, and that the function returns an integer, hence int. The "curly braces" ({ and }) signal the beginning and end of functions and other code blocks. 

On a side note if you are using C++ then you can also use `void main()` eliminating the need to return an exit code on exit. 

The `printf()` function is a way to display text on the screen. It will display what is in the quotes literall as-is on the screen ; well most of the time. [Heres](http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/cstdio/printf/) a cheatsheet for formatting the output using printf


##printf() Examples
{% highlight c %}
/* printf example */
#include <stdio.h>

int main()
{
   printf ("Characters: %c %c \n", 'a', 65);
   printf ("Decimals: %d %ld\n", 1977, 650000L);
   printf ("Preceding with blanks: %10d \n", 1977);
   printf ("Preceding with zeros: %010d \n", 1977);
   printf ("Some different radices: %d %x %o %#x %#o \n", 100, 100, 100, 100, 100);
   printf ("floats: %4.2f %+.0e %E \n", 3.1416, 3.1416, 3.1416);
   printf ("Width trick: %*d \n", 5, 10);
   printf ("%s \n", "A string");
   return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

### Operators in C

In C/C++ like normal logic there are a number of operators each with its own purpose. An exhaustive list can be found [here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operators_in_C_and_C%2B%2B)

**Assignment**

`=` is the assignment operator which is simply used to assign values to variables and constants. Here are few examples
{% highlight c %}
double x1,x2,x3,x4;
x1 = 1.0; // assigment to a constant
x1 = x2 = 2.0; // multiple assignment
x3 = x4 = x1*x2; // assignment to an evaluated expression
	
printf("\nx1 = %lf, x2 = %lf, x3 = %lf, x4 = %lf",x1,x2,x3,x4);
{% endhighlight %}

**Arithmetic Operators**

All arithmetic operators addition, subtraction, multiplication, division are available. These operators can be used normaly with numeric data types, however care must be taken for `Char` and `String` types. For those cases the values would be the numeric equivalent of the character from the ascii table. 

{% highlight c %}
	
double r1=1.0, r2=0.1;

printf("\nr1 = %lf, r2 = %lf",r1,r2);
printf("\nr1 + r2 = %lf",r1+r2); // addition
printf("\nr1 - r2 = %lf",r1-r2); // subraction
printf("\nr1 * r2 = %lf",r1*r2); // multiplication
printf("\nr1 / r2 = %lf\n",r1/r2); // division

int i1=7, i2=3;

printf("\ni1 = %d, i2 = %d",i1,i2);
printf("\ni1 / i2 = %d",i1/i2); // division
printf("\ni1 %% i2 = %d\n",i1%i2); // remainder from integer division
{% endhighlight %}


Incerment `++` and Decrement `--` operators perform the operation just like we expect them to but care must be taken as to how they are used for example `i++` known as Postfix Increment and `++i` known as Prefix Increment will give different results. This holds true for decrement operators also. 
{% highlight c %}
	
r1++; // increment (same as r1 = r1 + 1)
r2--; // decrement (same as r2 = r2 - 1)
printf("\nr1++ = %lf",r1);
printf("\nr2-- = %lf",r2);
	
r1+=5; // increment by 5 (same as r1 = r1 + 5)
r2-=5; // decrement by 5 (same as r2 = r2 - 5)
printf("\nr1+=5 = %lf",r1);
printf("\nr2-=5 = %lf",r2);
	
++r1; // increment (same as r1 = r1 + 1)
--r2; // decrement (same as r2 = r2 - 1)
printf("\n++r1 = %lf",r1);
printf("\n--r2 = %lf",r2);
{% endhighlight %}

**Comparison Operators -- Equality**

`==` is the Comparison Operator for `is equal to` , result returned is a boolean true or false. `!=` is the equivalent of `is not equal to`
The purpose is to build conditiondals that allow us to make decisions in the program. 
{% highlight c %}

i1 = 7; // true
i2 = 0; // false
printf("\ni1 = %d (true), i2 = %d (false)",i1,i2);

printf("\n(i1 == 7) = %d",i1 == 7); // equality
printf("\n(i1 != 7) = %d",i1 != 7); // inequality
printf("\n(i1 == i2) = %d",i1 == i2);
printf("\n(i1 != i2) = %d\n",i1 != i2);
{% endhighlight %}


**Relational Operators**

All of the usual relational conditionals can be built using e.g. Greater than `num1 > num2`, and can be compunded with the equality and not operator like `num1>=num2` and vice versa for Less than operator `<`

**Caution remember to compare between same data types for 100% deterministic behaviour**

{% highlight c %}
	
printf("\nr1 = %lf, r2 = %lf",r1,r2);
printf("\n(r1 > r2) = %d",r1 > r2); // greater than
printf("\n(r1 < r2) = %d",r1 < r2); // less than
printf("\n(i1 >= 7) = %d",i1 >= 7);   // greater than or equal to
printf("\n(i1 <= 7) = %d",i1 <= 7);   // less than or equal to
{% endhighlight %}

##Flow Statments

So bascially a program is a set of sequential statments that are executed, in order for meaning full use we have flow control statmenents that allow the program to be flexbile and make decision and follow diffrerent execution paths based on conditonal statments. 

**If/else Statment**

To recap some conditionals 
{% highlight c %}
//src : http://www.cprogramming.com/tutorial/c/lesson2.html

>     greater than              5 > 4 is TRUE
<     less than                 4 < 5 is TRUE
>=    greater than or equal     4 >= 4 is TRUE
<=    less than or equal        3 <= 4 is TRUE
==    equal to                  5 == 5 is TRUE
!=    not equal to              5 != 4 is TRUE
{% endhighlight %}

The if statments allow us to test conditionals and alter code flow based on whether the statment is true or not.

{% highlight c %}
int i1=8,i2=0,i3=11;

// if the logical condition is true then execute the program inside the {}
if(i1 == 7) {
	printf("\ni1 == 7");
}

if(i1 > 7) {
	printf("\ni1 > 7");
}

// if i2 is true then execute the first statement in {}, else 
// execute the second statement in {}
if(i2) {
	printf("\ni2 is true");
} 
else {
	printf("\ni2 is not true");		
}
	
// if-else ladder
if(i3 == 8) {
	printf("\ni3 == 8");
} else if (i3 == 9) {
	printf("\ni3 == 9");
} else if (i3 == 10) {
	printf("\ni3 == 10");
} else {
	printf("\ni3 not equal to 8, 9, or 10");
}
{% endhighlight %}

**Conditional Evaluations**
{% highlight c %}
A. !( 1 || 0 )         ANSWER: 0	
B. !( 1 || 1 && 0 )    ANSWER: 0 (AND is evaluated before OR)
C. !( ( 1 || 0 ) && 0 )  ANSWER: 1 (Parenthesis are useful)
{% endhighlight %}
**While Loop**

